---
projeto: Mulheres Que Tecem a Floresta
instituicao: Consórcio UnB/UFAC/UFRR
equipe: Gestão e Parceria Regional
tipo: Acervo de Consulta RAW (Transcrição)
autor: Acervo Digital WTF
data: '2008'
---
इंटरनेट
मानक
    Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information
Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public.
“जान1 का अ+धकार, जी1 का अ+धकार” Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan
“The Right to Information, The Right to Live”
“प0रा1 को छोड न' 5 तरफ” Jawaharlal Nehru
“Step Out From the Old to the New”
 IS 6874 (2008): Method of tests for  bamboo [CED 9: Timber
and Timber Stores]
  “!ान $ एक न' भारत का +नम-ण” Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda
   “Invent a New India Using Knowledge”
              “!ान एक ऐसा खजाना > जो कभी च0राया नहB जा सकता ह
”ै” “Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen”
है”
     Bhartṛhari—Nītiśatakam
ह

 
     
 June 2008
Price Group 5
BUREAU MANAK
OF BHA V AN,
@ BIS 2008
INDIAN ST ANDARDS
9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAF AR MARG
Ww%Tm “
Indian Standard
METHOD OF TESTS FOR BAMBOO ( First Revision)
ICS 79.060.20
NEW DELHI 110002
IS 6874:2008

 Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee, CED 9
FOREWORD
This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.
Bamboo occupies a prominent place in everyday life and is extensively used for both structural and non- structural purposes. Being a material that compares favorably with timber in strength, bamboo is increasingly being used in many structul al applications like posts, pole fencing, scaffoldings, house building, etc. In order to ascertain the suitability of bamboo for various structural uses, their physical properties are required to be tested. IS 6874: 1973 ‘Method of tests for round bamboo’ and IS 8242: 1976 ‘Methods of tests for split bamboos’ were developed for this purpose.
This standard was first published in 1973. Based on technological advancements made in the field leading to increased use of bamboo and the experience gained, a need was felt to redefine the test methods and to develop new test methods for determining additional properties. Recent studies have indicated that the suggested method for testing round bamboo in static bending in smaller length specimens does not reflect the strength potential of bamboo in longer lengths. As round bamboo is used normally in longer lengths in structural applications, the method of test in static bending has accordingly been modified in this revision. Further, test methods for determining additional properties like tensile strength parallel to grain and shear strength parallel to grain have been incorporated. The revision has been undertaken with the assistance of National Mission on Bamboo Application and is based
on studies carried out by Kerala Forest Research Institute, Peechi.
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.
In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to rounded off, it should be done in accordance with 1S2 : 1960 ‘Rules for off numerical values (revised)’ .

AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2012
TO
IS 6874 : 2008 METHOD OF TESTS FOR BAMBOO
(First Revision)
(Foreword, last para) — Substitute the following for the existing:
“In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’.”
(Page 2, clause 5.2.3) — Substitute the following for the existing formula for Basic mass per volume:
where
‘Mass per volume, in kg/m3
= mo 1 000 Vg
mo = oven dry mass, in g; and 3
Vg = greenvolume,incm.’
(CED 9)
 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

 IS No. 707:1976
Title
Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization (second revision)
3 TERMINOLOGY
For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given
in IS 707 and the following shall apply.
3.1 Bamboo Clump — A cluster of bamboo culms.
3.2 Bamboo Culm — A single shoot of bamboo, fully grown and usually hollow, except at nodes which are often swollen.
3.3 Clear Span — The distance between the two supports in static bending test. This shall be at least 30 times the outside diameter at the middle of the test specimen.
3.4 Internode successive nodes.
— The portion of a culm between two
3.5 Node — Thickening of bamboo at intervals along
Indian Standard
METHOD OF TESTS FOR BAMBOO ( First Revision)
1 SCOPE
This standard
determining the following physical and mechanical properties of round bamboo:
a) Physical properties:
i) Moisture content,
ii) Basic mass per volume or density, and iii) Shrinkage.
b) Mechanical properties:
i) Static bending strength,
ii) Compressive strength parallel to grain, iii) Tensile strength parallel to grain, and iv) Shear strength parallel to grain.
2 REFERENCE
The following standard contains provision, which through reference in this text constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below:
its length. The walls are thicker on both sides of the node or the place in a bamboo culm where branches sprout and where a diaphragm is inside the culm.
3.6 Outer Diameter — Diameter of a cross-section of a piece of bamboo measured from two opposite points on the outer surface.
3.7 Wall Thickness — Thickness of the culm wall. It is measured at two places at either end of a test specimen.
4 TEST CULMS
4.1 Sampling
For a particular bamboo species to be tested, at least six mature culms shalI be randomly selected from a large population, one culm each from clumps located in representative areas covering the geographical range of the species. If the species have pronounced taper, variation in culms due to taper shall be minimum. The culms shall be sound and free from defects.
4.LI Permissible Defects
Discoloration which is a change from the normal colour of the bamboo, which does not impair the strength, shall be permitted.
4.1.2 Non-permissible Defects
Borer attack and decay in the culms shall not be permitted. Splits/cracks and blue stains are also not permissible as these defects affect strength properties.
4.2 Marking, Felling and Conversion
Before felling, a ring shall be marked with paint on the culm at a height of one metre from the ground and also other details above the ring. The culms shall be felled according to standard harvesting practices. After felling the culm, the unusable parts from the culm bottom (crooked portion with very short internodes) and culm top (very low diameter and thin wall) shall be removed. The remaining culm length shall be measured and the culm shall be cut into two or three parts keeping in mind that for static bending, the length of the specimen shall be at least 30 times the outer diameter plus one metre. The parts to be used shall be marked with a ring at the lower end and its position in the culm shall be marked as B (bottom), M (middle) or T (top) along with other required details.
lays down method of tests for
IS 6874:2008

 1S 6874:2008
For the determination of physical properties like basic mass per volume and shrinkage, test specimens shall bc prepared from freshly felled bamboo.
4.3 Air-Drying and Conditioning
For the determination of mechanical properties, the culms shall be air-dried to about 12 percent moisture content. To be able to compare test results, the culms shall be conditioned at 27 & 2°C and 65 & 5 percent relative humidity at least for a week, so as to reach an equilibrium moisture content of 12 percent, before they are tested. Care shall be taken to ensure that large changes in moisture content do not take place during testing. The number of specimens in each test shall be not less than 12 (two from each culm).
Moisture content, percent =
‘i ‘m. X,OO
mO
5 PHYSICAL 5.1 Moisture
PROPERTIES Content
m, = initial mass of the test specimen, in g; and
mO = oven dry mass, in g.
The moisture content shall be reported with values
rounded to one-tenth of a percent.
5.2 Basic Mass per Volume or Density
5.2.1 T est Specimens
The test specimens for determining basic mass per volume shall be taken from freshly felled culms at different positions of the culm (base, middle and top). It shall be about 25 mm in length and 25 mm in width with full wall thickness. This test will also enable determination of the moisture content of the green specimen.
NOTE — For comparing reported values, basic mass per volume is the appropriate one as it depends only on green volume and oven dry mass which do not change due to weather conditions. However, if one is interested to determine mass per volume of a test specimen at any moisture content, for example, in air-dry condition, the volume is measured at that moisture content.
5.2.2 Procedure
The test specimens shall be weighed to an accuracy of 0.01 g. The green volume shall be measured by water displacement method. A simple way is to place a beaker containing water on a top-pan balance and tare the weight to zero. The test specimen attached to a sharp needle shall then be completely immersed in water while ensuring that the specimen does not touch the beaker. The reading in the balance would indicate the mass of the displaced water.
Considering the specific gravity of water as 1.0, this reading shall be considered as the volume of the test specimen, in cm3 (V~).
After determining the green volume, the test specimen shall be dried in a hot-air oven as described in 5.1.2 to obtain the oven dry mass (mO).
5.2.3 Calculation
Basic mass per volume shall be calculated as given
below:
where
5.1.1 T est Specimens
The specimens b-determining
moisture content shall
gem?rit]ly be taken from the tested specimens for mechanical testing, immediately after completion of each test and, as far as possible, from near the place of t%ilure. It shall be about 25 mm in length and 25 mm in width and having full wall thickness. In the case of shear test, the detached portion shall be taken for
determination of moisture content.
When moisture content of any other specimen, other than from the test specimens for mechanical tests, is to be determined, these shall be taken at least 150 mm away from the nearest edge of the culm.
The test specimens shall immediately be put in a polythene bag in order to ensure no loss of moisture.
5.1.2 Procedure
The test specimens shall be weighed (mi) to an accuracy of 0.01 g and then dried in a hot-air oven at a temperature of 103 k 2°C for 24 h. The test specimen shall then be weighed and drying continued thereafter. The weighing shall be carried out and recorded every 2 h until the difference between successive weighings does not exceed 0.01 g, when the drying shall be completed. The final mass shall be considered as the oven dry mass (ntO).
Care shall be taken to prevent any change in moisture content between the cutting of the specimen and the first weighing, and between the removal from the oven and subsequent weighings.
5.1.3 Calculation
The moisture content of each test specimen shall be calculated as the loss in mass, expressed as a percentage of the oven dry mass.
Mass per volume, in kg/m3 = ~ x 100 6
where
mO = oven dry mass, in g; and Vg = green volume, in cm3.

 The mass per volume shall be reported with values rounded to the nearest kg/m3. If Vw corresponds to the volume of the test specimen at a particular moisture content, w, then the mass per volume at that moisture content, shall be determined using Vw.
5.3 Shrinkage
5.3.1 T est Specimens
The test specimens shall be taken from freshly felled culms, preferably from the lowest section of the culm. Specimens shall be 100 mm in length and free from nodes.
5.3.2 Procedure
Shrinkage shall be determined along diameter, wall thickness and length of the test specimen. Length and diameter shall be measured correct to 1 mm while the wall thickness shall be correct to 0.1 mm.
Suitable marking shall be done on the specimens (see Fig. 1) to facilitate taking observations at the same place ev~ry ~ime, on each specimen, dimensions of four diameters and four wall thicknesses (two at either end) and two lengths shall be measured. The specimens shall be allowed to dry slowly. Mass and dimensions of diameter, wall thickness and length of the specimens shall be recorded periodically until the readings are constant (air-dry condition). The specimens shall then be placed in a hot-air over at 103 & 2°C till it reaches a constant weight (oven-dry condition). The mass and dimensions of the specimens shall be taken at the oven- dry condition.
5.3.3 Calculation
Shrinkage percentage (along diameter or wall thickness or length) correct to one decimal place shall he calculated as follows:
D.–D
J-.-Jx loo Shrinkage along diameter, percent = ~,
,
t –tf
Shrinkage along wall thickness, percent = >
&--J
6 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 6.1 Static Bendhg Strength
6.1.1 T est Specimens
The test specimens, free from defects like cracks and crookedness, shall be taken from the air-dried and conditioned culms. The test specimens shall be free from wide varying taper. The length of the specimens shall be at least 30 times diameter at the middle point plus 1 m.
6.1.2 Testing Machine
A suitable testing machine capable of measuring load to the nearest 100 N and deflection to the nearest 1 mm shall be used.
The test shall be a four-point bending test. The test specimen shall be mounted on suitable saddles [see Fig. 2A] in such a way that the reaction forces at the supports are transmitted to the nearby nodes. The bamboo culm shall be allowed to rotate freely at the supports. The load shall be divided into two halves by
Shrinkage along length, percent = ~, x 100
, B2
where
Di, ti, li=
Df, tf, lf =
initial dimensions of outer diameter, wall thickness and length, respectively, in mm; and
final dimensions of outer diameter, wall thickness and length, respectively, in mm.
AZ
FIG. 1MEASUREMENTOFDIAMETERANDWALL THICKNESS
From the various readings of mass and finally the oven dry mass, corresponding moisture content of the test specimen and shrinkage at that moisture content can be determined.
x 100
B1
IS 6874:2008
Al

 IS 6874:2008
an appropriate beam resting on saddles in such a way that the loads are applied to the nodes [see Fig. 2B) ]. The length of the specimen shall be suitable to have a clear span of 30 times its diameter at the middle point.
6.1.3 Procedure
An I-beam of suitable length to support the test specimen shall be kept at right angle to the platform of the testing machine. As shown in Fig. 2, the test specimen shall be placed on supports with saddles and a wooden beam shall be placed over the specimen using saddles in such a way that load is applied through the loading head of the testing machine. The test specimen shall be allowed
to find its own position; the specimen, saddles, load and supports shall be aligned visually in one vertical plane.
The loading of the test specimen shall be carried out uniformly at constant speed. The loading head of testing machine shall move at the rate of 0.5 mm/s.
Deflection at the middle of the span shall be noted by means of a dial gauge at load increments of every 500 N. The load shall be recorded at the points of sudden changes in deflection, at the time of failure and at maximum level, if different from the load at failure. Crack development and the form of failure shall be noted. A load-deflection diagram shall be plotted.
f)
FaH
SADDLE
I
,
LOAD
I I1[
I
2A Method of Applying Load and Supporting Bamboo with Saddles r
1J
\\ \\ \\
2B Four Point Bending T est
FIG. 2 ST A TIC BENDING STRENGTH TEST
III<
1’

 After the test, the outer diameter D and wall thickness t,as close to the points of load as possible, shall be measured (see 5.3.2).
6.1.4 Calculation
a) The moment of inertia 1 in mm4, shall be calculated as follows:
right angles to the length of the specimen; the end planes shall be flat, with a maximum deviation of 0.2 mm.
6.2.2 T esting Machine
At least one platen of the testing machine shall be equipped with a hemispherical bearing to obtain uniform distribution of load over the ends of the specimen (Unlike while testing timber specimen, bamboo test specimens shall be dipped in molten sulphur or a layer of Teflon and wax shall be kept between bamboo test specimen and steel platens, to reduce friction to a minimum. This is mainly because of the hollow nature of bamboo).
6.2.3 Procedure
The specimen shall be placed so that the centre of the movable head is vertically above the centre of the cross- section of the specimen and a small load of not more than 1 kN shall be applied to set the specimen.
The load shall be applied continuously and the movable he~d of the testing machine shaJ1travel at a constant rate of 0.01 mm/s.
The maximum load at which the specimen fails shall be recorded.
6.2.4 Calculation
The maximum compressive strength CTul,i,n Wmm2,
where
I= ;[D4
- (D-2t)4]
D = outer diameter, in mm; and
t = wall thickness, in mm.
b) The ultimate strength GUIi,n static bending, in
N/mm*, shall be determined as follows:
where
I = moment of inertia, in mm4;
F = maximum load, in N;
L = effective span, in mm; and
D = outer diameter, in mm.
crul,shall be reported to an accuracy of 1 N/ mm’.
shall be determined as follows:
where
Full = maximum load, in N;
c) The modulus of elasticity (Y oung’ s E, in N/mm2, shall be determined
~= 23s L3 1296 I
where
L = clear span, in mm;
modulus), as follows:
I = moment of inertia, in mm4; and
s = slope of a linear part in the load- deflection diagram, in N/mm.
E shall be reported by rounding to the nearest 100 N/mmz.
6.2 Compressive Strength Parallel to Grain
6.2.1 T est Specimens
Specimens for compressive strength tests shall be taken from the undamaged ends of specimens used in static bending tests. The test specimens shall be from internode.
The length of the specimen shall be taken equal to the outer diameter. Outer diameter and wall thickness shall be measured as described in 5.3.2.
The end planes of the specimen shall be perfectly at
f[D2-(D-2t)’m]i2n;m
outer diameter, in mm; and = wall thickness, in mm.
A=
D=
area of cross-section
of test specimen
crUlsthaIl be rounded to the nearest 0.5 N/mmz. 6.3 Tensile Strength Parallel to Grain
6.3.1 T est Specimens
Specimens for tensile strength test shall be taken from the undamaged ends of specimens used in static bending tests. The test specimens shall be with one node in the centre.
The general direction of the fibres shall be parallel to the longitudinal axis of the test specimen. The length of the specimen shall be 60 mm and the width shall be
10 to 20 mm, so that the test specimen is more or less flat. The thickness of the specimen shall be that of the
IS 6874:2008

 IS 6874:2008
wall thickness or less, depending on the diameter of the culm. All the dimensions shall be measured to an accuracy of 0.1 mm,
It shall be permitted to use test pieces with laminated ends for better grip, as shown in Fig. 3.
6.4 Shear Strength Parallel to Grain
6.4.1 T est Specimens
Specimens for shear strength tests shall be taken from the undamaged ends of the specimens used in static bending tests. The test specimens shall be from internode. The length of the specimen shall be taken equal to the outer diameter. Outer diameter and wall thickness shall be measured as described in 5.3.2. The end planes of the specimen shall be at right angles to the length of the specimen; the end planes shall be flat.
6.4.2 T esting Machine/Jig
The tests shall be carried out in a suitable testing machine. The specimens shall be supported at the lower end over a steel block of two triangles opposite to one another. A square steel block shall be cut diagonally in such a way so that two opposite triangles are still intact and two other triangles are separate. The test specimen shall be loaded at the upper end over the other two independetn!t’iangulbahrks (.iee Fig. 4). This resuks in fourshearareas.
6.4.3 Procedure
The specimen shall be placed between steel triangular
blocks as explained in 6.4.2, in such a way that the centre of the movable head is vertically above the centre of the cross-section of the specimen. A small load of not more than 1 kN shall be applied to set the specimen.
The load shall be applied continuously and the movable head of the testing machine shall travel at a constant rate of 0.01 mrrds.
The maximum load at which the specimen fails and the number of shear areas that fail shall be recorded.
6.4.4 Calculation
The ultimate shear strength O.I,, in N/mm*, shall be
60 lm
~ LAMINATED END
f
*
FIG. 3 TENSILE 6.3.2 Testing Machine
L.
10 T020mm
t = Thickness
of the test specimen
STRENGTH TEST SPECIMEN
The grips of the testing machine shall ensure that the load is applied along the longitudinal axis of the test piece, and shall prevent longitudinal twisting of the test piece.
6.3.3 Procedure
The grips shall press the test specimen perpendicular
to the fibres and in radial direction.
The load shall be applied continuously and the movable head of the testing machine shall travel at a constant rate of 0.01 mm/s. The maximum load shall be recorded.
6.3.4 Calculation
The maximum tensile strength OUILin. N/mn12, shall be
determined as follows:
Fu,, Ou,t = ~
where
F,,,, = maximum load, in N; and
A= area of cross-section of test specimen, in mm2.
cru,,shall be rounded to the nearest full number.
determined
as follows:
LAMINATED END
where
Ful, = maximum load, in N;
t
L=
Fult CT,l,=, ~
= mean of wall thickness at four points, in mm; and
mean of length of test specimen at four points where wall thickness is measured, in mm.
crul,shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

 Or,qanization
In personal capacity (2989/D, 12th Main, HAL II Stage, Bangalore 560008)
Representative(s)
SHRI SHYAMSUNDER(Chairman)
SHRI HARMH KHAIT AN
PROJECTCOORDINA TOR
SHRIA. C. LAKSHMANA
DR K. A. KUSHALAPP A(Alternate)
DIRECTOR DIRECTORGENERAL DIRECTORGENERAL DIRECTOR
SHRIC. R. SAHA
SHRI N. B. SHELAR(Alternate)
SHRI SAJJANBHAJANKA S E C R E T A R Y( A l t e r n a t e )
Andaman Chamber uf Commerce & Industries, Bamboo and Cane Technology Centre, Guwahati Bamboo Society of India, Bangalore
Kolkata
Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee
Directomte General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Directorate of Stnndardization, New Delhi
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi
Federation of Indian Plywood & P.mel Industry, New Delhi
Forest Department, Bhopal Forest Department, Raipur
PRINCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS PRINCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS
,. ;‘., I
3 mm
lr/“I ‘.
1’\ /“\
}.., ., I
1’ \
1’ I
;1
1STEEL II
PQ
(!!!!!)
II I
FIG. 4 TRINGULAR BLOCKS FOR SHEAR TEST
ANNEX A
(F{~reword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION
Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee, CED 9
/I4 ,,.
IS 6874:2008

 IS 6874:2008
Orgarrizatiorr
Representative(s)
Forest Research Institute, Debra Dun
Indian Academy of Wood Science, Bangalore
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, Debra Dun Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training Institute, Bangalore
Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bangalore
Karnataka State Forest Industries Corporation Ltd, Bangalore
Kerala Forest Research Institute, Peechi
Kutty Flush Doors & Co Pvt Ltd, Chennai
Ministry of Defence, Gwalior
Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi
Rubber Board, Kottayam
Timber Development Association of India, Debra Dun Wimco Limi(ecf, Mumbai
In pcrsona[ capacity (606 I?, [Block, ?ZISrage, UVCE Layout, WOC Road, Basaveshwrrranagar BangaIore-560079, Karnataka)
DR S. S. NEGI
DR VIMALKOTHtYAL(Alternate)
PRESIDENT
DIRECTORGENERAL
DIRECTOR
SHR[ S, PADMANABHAN(Alternate)
DIRECTOR
DR R. V. RAO (Alternate)
SHRIV. P. HIRAMATH
SHR[ S. SHWAPRAKASH(Alternate)
DIRECTOR DRGNANAHARAN(Alternate)
SHRI K. SANKARAKRNHNAN
COL Y . G. KRISHNAN(Alternate)
DIRECTOR
SHRIH. C. pm’r(Ahernate)
DEPUTYINSPECTORGENERALOF FORESTS DIRECTOR
SECRETARY
CHIEF EXECUTIVEOFFICER
SHKi K. DAMODARAN
SHRIA. K. SAINLScientist ‘F’& Head (CED) [Representing Director General (Ex-ojjicio)]
BIS Directorate General
Member Secretary
SHRI J. ROY CHOWDHURY Scientist ‘E’ (CED), BIS
Timber Terminology, Conversion, Seasoning, Preservation, Grading and Testing Subcommittee, CED9:1
Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bangalore Andaman T]mber Industries, Kolkata
ASCU Hickson Limited, Kolkata
Borax Morarji, Coil
Building Materials Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee
Central Mining Research Station (CSIR), Dhanbad Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Kanpur
Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi Directorate of Standardization, New Delhi
Federation of Indian Plywood & Panel Industry, New Delhi
Forest Department, Bangalore Forest Department, Debra Dun Forest Department, Gandhinagar
DR R. V. RAO (Convener)
SHRI HARISH KHALTAN
SHRI RAIW AGARWAL SHRIJ. BASU(Alternate)
,%ml H. T. KAPADIA
SHRIS. RANGARAJAN(Alternate)
REPKESENT A TWE DIRECTOR
SHRI B. S. RAWAT(Alternate) DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR DIRECTORGENERAL DIRECTORGENERAL DIRECTOR
SHRI JAYDEEPCHITLANGIA S E C R E T A R Y( A l t e r n a t e )
PRINCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS PRINCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS PRINCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS
 Bangalore liid;aii Nywcw’
Organization
Representative(s)
Forest Department, Government of Chhattisgarh, Raipur
Forest Research Institute (Forest Products Division), Debra Dun
Forest Research Institute (Pathology Division), Debra Dun
Forest Research Institute (Systemic Botany Branch), Debra Dun
Forest Research Institute (Wood Anatomy), Debra Dun
Forest Research Institute (Wood Preservation), Debra Dun
Forest Research Institute (Wood Seasoning), Debra Dun
Gurdit Institute Private L]mited, Dharwar
Himachal Pradesh State Forest Corporation, Shimla
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, Debra Dun
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training Institute,
PRiNCIPALCHIEF CONSERVATOORF FORESTS SHRFV. K. JAIN
SHRI VIMAL KOTHTY A(LAlternate) DR A. N. SHUKLA
DR N. K. S. HARSH(Alternate) DR S. A. S. BMWAS
DR SMER CHAND (Alternate) DR (SMT) SANGITAGUPTA
DR P. K. PANDEY(Alternate) DR SADHANATRIPATHI
SHRI AZMAL SAMANI(Alternate) SHRtNIRMALUPRITI
DR KISHANKUMAR(Alternate)
SHRI Y ASH KARAN SINGH
MANAGINGDIRECTOR EXECUTIVEDIRECTOR(Alternate)
SHRI B. K. BHATJA
SHRI S. K. KOHLI (Alternate)
SHRI G. S. BENIPAL
SHR] K. SHYAMASUNDER
SHRI S. Z. M. KAMAL (Alternate) &iki ~. C. MEFHEW$
SHRIM. VENUGOPALNAIDU(Alternate) SHRI S. PADMANABHAN
SHRI S. Z. M. KAMAL(Alternafe) SHRI C. BHASKARNA Y AR
SHRIV. J. MATHEW(Ahernute) REPRESENTATIVE
SHRI V . P . HIREMA TH
SHRI S. SHWAPRAKASH(Alternate)
DIRECTOR
R E P R E S E N T A T W ( EA l t e r n a t e )
SHRIK. SANKARAKRISHNA
COL Y. G. KRISHNAN(Alternare)
SHRI A. K. DUBEY DR BIPIN BEHARI DIRECTORGENERAL DIRECTOR(Physical) DEPUTYDIRECTOR DIRECTOR DIRECTOR REPRESENT A TIVE SHRI P. K. HARLSS SENIORMANAOER DR SATMHKUMAR
liidiid;kt R&%iAi & Trihkg Instdiite, Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training Institute,
Bangalore
Indian Rubber Wood Task Force, Kottayam
Institute of Wood Science & Technology (Wood Properties & Uses Division), Bangalore
Karnataka State Forest Industries Corporation, Bangalore
Kerala Forest Research Institute, Peechi
Kutty Flush Doors & Furnitures Co Pvt Ltd, Chennai
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Ltd, Bhopal Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi
Ministry of Railways (Represented by RDSO), New Delhi National Test House, Kolkata
Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), New Delhi Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat
Rubber Research Institute of India, Kottayam
Sivakasi Chamber of Match Industries, Sivakasi
Southern Veneers & Wood Works Ltd, Tlllicherry
U.P. Forest Corporation, Lucknow
In personal capacity (C/o American Connexion, 214, Phase II Vasant Vihac Debra Dun-248006, Uttaranchal)
Bangalore
IS 6874:2008

 Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of ‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’.
This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 9 (7270).
Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue
BUREAU OF INDIAN ST ANDARDS
Headquarters :
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402
Regional OffIces :
Text Affected
Central :
Eastern :
Northern :
Southern :
W estern :
Branches :
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002
1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKA T A 700054
SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022
C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113
Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093
{
{
23378499,23378561 23378626,23379120
2603843 { 2609285
22541216,22541442 22542519,22542315
AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD. P ARW ANOO.
BANGALORE.
GUW AHA TI.
P A TNA. PUNE.
28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892
BHOP AL. BHUBANESHW AR.
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR.
RAJKOT. THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAP A TNAM.
Telegrams: Manaksanstha
(Common
to all offices)
Telephone
23237617 { 23233841
COIMBA TORE. F ARIDABAD.
Printed at Sunshine Graphics
